Cross-posted blog post with DuckDB (#168)
apache/arrow-site: _posts/2021-12-3-arrow-duckdb.md

---
layout: post
title: "DuckDB quacks Arrow: A zero-copy data integration between Arrow and DuckDB"
date: "2021-12-3 00:00:00"
author: Pedro Holanda, Jonathan Keane
categories: [application]
---
<!--
{% comment %}
Licensed to the Apache Software Foundation (ASF) under one or more
contributor license agreements.  See the NOTICE file distributed with
this work for additional information regarding copyright ownership.
The ASF licenses this file to you under the Apache License, Version 2.0
(the "License"); you may not use this file except in compliance with
the License.  You may obtain a copy of the License at

http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
{% endcomment %}
-->

*TLDR: The zero-copy integration between DuckDB and Apache Arrow allows for rapid analysis of larger than memory datasets in Python and R using either SQL or relational APIs.*

> This post is a collaboration with and cross-posted on [the DuckDB blog](https://duckdb.org/2021/12/03/duck-arrow.html) as well

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This post is a collaboration with and cross-posted on [the DuckDB blog](https://duckdb.org/2021/12/03/duck-arrow.html).
```

Part of [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org) is an in-memory data format optimized for analytical libraries. Like Pandas and R Dataframes, it uses a columnar data model. But the Arrow project contains more than just the format: The Arrow C++ library, which is accessible in Python, R, and Ruby via bindings, has additional features that allow you to compute efficiently on datasets. These additional features are on top of the implementation of the in-memory format described above. The datasets may span multiple files in Parquet, CSV, or other formats, and files may even be on remote or cloud storage like HDFS or Amazon S3. The Arrow C++ query engine supports the streaming of query results, has an efficient implementation of complex data types (e.g., Lists, Structs, Maps), and can perform important scan optimizations like Projection and Filter Pushdown.

> [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org) is a new analytical data management system that is designed to run complex SQL queries within other processes. DuckDB has bindings for R and Python, among others. DuckDB can query Arrow datasets directly and stream query results back to Arrow. This integration allows users to query Arrow data using DuckDB's SQL Interface and API, while taking advantage of DuckDB's parallel vectorized execution engine, without requiring any extra data copying.

Reviewer: Can this say it's also taking advantage of the Arrow library's predicate pushdown? So you're getting the benefit of both?

> There are three main aspects that make this integration unique:

Reviewer: I think what makes the _integration_ unique is that there's zero-copy streaming in both directions. You can use both the Arrow engine and DuckDB to build a query together, without serializing between.

Author: Yeah, these are more the end result effects of the unique integration

1. **Larger Than Memory Analysis:** Since both libraries support streaming query results, we are capable of executing on data without fully loading it from disk. Instead, we can execute one batch at a time. This allows us to execute queries on data that is bigger than memory.
2. **Complex Data Types:** DuckDB can efficiently process complex data types that can be stored in Arrow vectors, including arbitrarily nested structs, lists, and maps.
3. **Advanced Optimizer:** DuckDB's state-of-the-art optimizer can push down filters and projections directly into Arrow scans. As a result, only relevant columns and partitions will be read, allowing the system to e.g., take advantage of partition elimination in Parquet files. This significantly accelerates query execution.

For those that are just interested in benchmarks, you can jump ahead [benchmark section below](#Benchmark Comparison).

## Quick Tour

> Before diving into the details of the integration, in this section we provide a quick motivating example of how powerful and simple to use is the DuckDB-Arrow integration. With a few lines of code, you can already start querying Arrow datasets. Say you want to analyze the infamous [NYC Taxi Dataset](https://www1.nyc.gov/site/tlc/about/tlc-trip-record-data.page) and figure out if groups tip more or less than single riders.

Reviewer 2: One thing that I'm not sure about is that we talk about "(Arrow) datasets" as a thing but never really define it, and I wonder if people might walk away confused, since there's "an Arrow Dataset object", a "dataset of files", and "a dataset of Arrow (IPC) files". This also occurs below on L180 (where we also refer to Datasets as a proper noun).

Author: We could link to https://arrow.apache.org/docs/cpp/dataset.html, (and/or the python and R versions of those docs)

### R
Both Arrow and DuckDB support dplyr pipelines for people more comfortable with using dplyr for their data analysis. The Arrow package includes two helper functions that allow us to pass data back and forth between Arrow and DuckDB (`to_duckdb()` and `to_arrow()`).

> This is especially useful in cases where something is supported in one of Arrow or DuckDB but not the other. For example, if you find a complex dplyr pipeline where the SQL translation doesn't work with DuckDB, use `to_arrow()` before the pipeline to use the Arrow engine or if you have a function (e.g., windowed aggregates) that aren't implemented in Arrow use `to_duckdb()` to use the DuckDB engine. All while not paying any cost to (re)serialize the data when you pass it back and forth!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially useful in cases where something is supported in one of Arrow or DuckDB but not the other. For example, if you find a complex dplyr pipeline where the SQL translation doesn't work with DuckDB, use `to_arrow()` before the pipeline to use the Arrow engine. Or, if you have a function (e.g., windowed aggregates) that aren't yet implemented in Arrow, use `to_duckdb()` to use the DuckDB engine. All while not paying any cost to (re)serialize the data when you pass it back and forth!
```

```R
library(duckdb)
library(arrow)
library(dplyr)

# Open dataset using year,month folder partition

> ds <- open_dataset("nyc-taxi", partitioning = c("year", "month"))

Reviewer 2: Should we explicitly call out here that this is Arrow's open_dataset function and that the initial filter is done by the Arrow query engine?

Author: yes, I've added the explicit namespacing here, thanks for the reminder!

> ds <- open_dataset("nyc-taxi", partitioning = c("year", "month"))

Author: ```suggestion
ds <- arrow::open_dataset("nyc-taxi", partitioning = c("year", "month"))
```

#### Python

There are two ways in Python of querying data from Arrow:
1. Through the Relational API
```py
# Reads Parquet File to an Arrow Table
arrow_table = pq.read_table('integers.parquet')

# Transforms Arrow Table -> DuckDB Relation
rel_from_arrow = duckdb.arrow(arrow_table)

# we can run a SQL query on this and print the result
print(rel_from_arrow.query('arrow_table', 'SELECT SUM(data) FROM arrow_table WHERE data > 50').fetchone())

# Transforms DuckDB Relation -> Arrow Table
arrow_table_from_duckdb = rel_from_arrow.arrow()
```

2. By using replacement scans and querying the object directly with SQL:
```py
# Reads Parquet File to an Arrow Table
arrow_table = pq.read_table('integers.parquet')

# Gets Database Connection
con = duckdb.connect()

# we can run a SQL query on this and print the result
print(con.execute('SELECT SUM(data) FROM arrow_table WHERE data > 50').fetchone())

# Transforms Query Result from DuckDB to Arrow Table
# We can directly read the arrow object through DuckDB's replacement scans.
con.execute("SELECT * FROM arrow_table").fetch_arrow_table()
```

It is possible to transform both DuckDB Relations and Query Results back to Arrow.

#### R

> In R, the primary way to interact with Arrow is by registering the table as a view (an alternative is to use dplyr as shown above).

Reviewer: Is this "the primary way"?

Author: I read this as in opposition to the Python Relational API, though agree we should tweak the wording to make that clear

> In R, the primary way to interact with Arrow is by registering the table as a view (an alternative is to use dplyr as shown above).

Author: ```suggestion
In R, you can interact with Arrow data in DuckDB by registering the table as a view (an alternative is to use dplyr as shown above).
```

```r
library(duckdb)
library(arrow)
library(dplyr)

# Reads Parquet File to an Arrow Table
arrow_table <- arrow::read_parquet("integers.parquet", as_data_frame = FALSE)

# Gets Database Connection
con <- dbConnect(duckdb::duckdb())

# Registers arrow table as a DuckDB view
arrow::to_duckdb(arrow_table, table_name = "arrow_table", con = con)

# we can run a SQL query on this and print the result
print(dbGetQuery(con, "SELECT SUM(data) FROM arrow_table WHERE data > 50"))

# Transforms Query Result from DuckDB to Arrow Table
result <- dbSendQuery(con, "SELECT * FROM arrow_table")
```

### Streaming Data from/to Arrow

> In the previous section, we depicted how to interact with Arrow tables. However, Arrow also allows users to interact with the data in a streaming fashion. Either consuming it (e.g., from an Arrow Dataset) or producing it (e.g., Handling out a Record Batch Reader). And of course, DuckDB is able to consume Datasets and produce Record Batch Readers. This example uses the NYC Taxi Dataset, stored in Parquet files partitioned by year and month, which we can download through the Arrow R package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the previous section, we depicted how to interact with Arrow tables. However, Arrow also allows users to interact with the data in a streaming fashion. Either consuming it (e.g., from an Arrow Dataset) or producing it (e.g., returning a RecordBatchReader). And of course, DuckDB is able to consume Datasets and produce RecordBatchReaders. This example uses the NYC Taxi Dataset, stored in Parquet files partitioned by year and month, which we can download through the Arrow R package:
```

```R
arrow::copy_files("s3://ursa-labs-taxi-data", "nyc-taxi")
```

#### Python
```py
# Reads dataset partitioning it in year/month folder
nyc_dataset = ds.dataset('nyc-taxi/', partitioning=["year", "month"])

# Gets Database Connection
con = duckdb.connect()

> query = con.execute("SELECT * FROM nyc")

Reviewer 2: Wait, how does DuckDB know that "nyc" == "nyc_dataset"? Is there a line missing here?

Reviewer 3: @pdet?

Reviewer 4: Yes. It should be nyc_dataset

> query = con.execute("SELECT * FROM nyc")

Author: ```suggestion
query = con.execute("SELECT * FROM nyc_dataset")
```

# This retrieves the first batch
chunk = record_batch_reader.read_next_batch()
```
#### R
```r
# Reads dataset partitioning it in year/month folder
nyc_dataset = open_dataset("nyc-taxi/", partitioning = c("year", "month"))

# Gets Database Connection
con <- dbConnect(duckdb::duckdb())

# We can use the same function as before to register our arrow dataset
duckdb::duckdb_register_arrow(con, "nyc", nyc_dataset)

res <- dbSendQuery(con, "SELECT * FROM nyc", arrow = TRUE)
# DuckDB's queries can now produce a Record Batch Reader
record_batch_reader <- duckdb::duckdb_fetch_record_batch(res)

# Which means we can stream the whole query per batch.
# This retrieves the first batch
cur_batch <- record_batch_reader$read_next_batch()
```

The preceding R code shows in low-level detail how the data is streaming. We provide the helper `to_arrow()` in the Arrow package which is a wrapper around this that makes it easy to incorporate this streaming into a dplyr pipeline. [^1]

## Benchmark Comparison

Here we demonstrate in a simple benchmark the performance difference between querying Arrow datasets with DuckDB and querying Arrow datasets with Pandas.

> For both the Projection and Filter pushdown comparison, we will use Arrow tables. That is due to Pandas not being capable of consuming Arrow stream objects.

Author: @pdet could we add information about the specs of / what kind of machine these were run on, as well as if you DuckDB was taking advantage of parallelism while you ran it (IIRC, the parallelism defaults to off with DuckDB)?

h/t @jorisvandenbossche

Reviewer 3: parallelism is now on by default, and machine I think recent m1 MacBook Pro

Reviewer 4: For the machine I used the diamonds for the nyc one
https://www.monetdb.org/wiki/Scilens-configuration-standard
And m1 for the tpch

> For both the Projection and Filter pushdown comparison, we will use Arrow tables. That is due to Pandas not being capable of consuming Arrow stream objects.

Author: ```suggestion
For both the Projection and Filter pushdown comparison, we will use Arrow tables. That is due to Pandas not being capable of consuming Arrow stream objects.

For the NYC Taxi benchmarks, we used the [scilens diamonds configuration](https://www.monetdb.org/wiki/Scilens-configuration-standard) and for the tpch benchmarks, we used an m1 MacBook Pro. In both cases, parallelism in DuckDB was used (which is now on by default).
```

How does this sound?

Reviewer 4: I think that looks good!

### Projection Pushdown

In this example we run a simple aggregation on two columns of our lineitem table.

``` python
# DuckDB
lineitem = pq.read_table('lineitemsf1.snappy.parquet')
con = duckdb.connect()

# Transforms Query Result from DuckDB to Arrow Table
con.execute("""SELECT sum(l_extendedprice * l_discount) AS revenue
                FROM
                lineitem;""").fetch_arrow_table()

```

``` python
# Pandas
arrow_table = pq.read_table('lineitemsf1.snappy.parquet')

# Converts an Arrow table to a Dataframe
df = arrow_table.to_pandas()

# Runs aggregation
res =  pd.DataFrame({'sum': [(df.l_extendedprice * df.l_discount).sum()]})

# Creates an Arrow Table from a Dataframe
new_table = pa.Table.from_pandas(res)

```

|    Name     | Time (s) |
|-------------|---------:|
| DuckDB  | 0.19    |
| Pandas      | 2.13    |

> The lineitem table is composed of 16 columns, however, to execute this query only two columns ```l_extendedprice ``` and  *  ``` l_discount ```are necessary. Since DuckDB can push down the projection of these columns, it is capable of executing this query about one order of magnitude faster than Pandas.

Author: @jorisvandenbossche also notest that it *is* possible to do some projection/filter pushdown with Pandas, though one has to do it manually in the `read_parquet()` call. It would be good to mention that here to be totally upfront about our comparison.

> The lineitem table is composed of 16 columns, however, to execute this query only two columns ```l_extendedprice ``` and  *  ``` l_discount ```are necessary. Since DuckDB can push down the projection of these columns, it is capable of executing this query about one order of magnitude faster than Pandas.

Author: ```suggestion
The lineitem table is composed of 16 columns, however, to execute this query only two columns ```l_extendedprice``` and  *  ```l_discount``` are necessary. Since DuckDB can push down the projection of these columns, it is capable of executing this query about one order of magnitude faster than Pandas.
```

Very minor spacing adjustments @pdet are these meaningful?

Reviewer 4: I think that looks fine.

### Streaming

As demonstrated before, DuckDB is capable of consuming and producing Arrow data in a streaming fashion. In this section we run a simple benchmark, to showcase the benefits in speed and memory usage when comparing it to full materialization and Pandas. This example uses the full NYC taxi dataset which you can download

``` python
# DuckDB
# Open dataset using year,month folder partition
nyc = ds.dataset('nyc-taxi/', partitioning=["year", "month"])

# Get database connection
con = duckdb.connect()

# Run query that selects part of the data
query = con.execute("SELECT total_amount, passenger_count,year FROM nyc where total_amount > 100 and year > 2014")

# Create Record Batch Reader from Query Result.
# "fetch_record_batch()" also accepts an extra parameter related to the desired produced chunk size.
record_batch_reader = query.fetch_record_batch()

# Retrieve all batch chunks
chunk = record_batch_reader.read_next_batch()

> while (len(chunk) > 0):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
while len(chunk) > 0:
```

    chunk = record_batch_reader.read_next_batch()
```

``` python
# Pandas

> # We must exclude one of the columns of the NYC dataset due to an unimplemented cast in Arrow.

Reviewer 2: (side note: I think you can fix this by telling Arrow to scan more than one file to determine the schema)

Author: Yeah, specifying unify_schemas works, though scans more. We also have plans to (finally) clean this inconsistency up at some point!

{% endcomment %}
-->

*TLDR: The zero-copy integration between DuckDB and Apache Arrow allows for rapid analysis of larger than memory datasets in Python and R using either SQL or relational APIs.*

This post is a collaboration with and cross-posted on [the DuckDB blog](https://duckdb.org/2021/12/03/duck-arrow.html).

Part of [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org) is an in-memory data format optimized for analytical libraries. Like Pandas and R Dataframes, it uses a columnar data model. But the Arrow project contains more than just the format: The Arrow C++ library, which is accessible in Python, R, and Ruby via bindings, has additional features that allow you to compute efficiently on datasets. These additional features are on top of the implementation of the in-memory format described above. The datasets may span multiple files in Parquet, CSV, or other formats, and files may even be on remote or cloud storage like HDFS or Amazon S3. The Arrow C++ query engine supports the streaming of query results, has an efficient implementation of complex data types (e.g., Lists, Structs, Maps), and can perform important scan optimizations like Projection and Filter Pushdown.

> [DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org) is a new analytical data management system that is designed to run complex SQL queries within other processes. DuckDB has bindings for R and Python, among others. DuckDB can query Arrow datasets directly and stream query results back to Arrow. This integration allows users to query Arrow data using DuckDB's SQL Interface and API, while taking advantage of DuckDB's parallel vectorized execution engine, without requiring any extra data copying.

Author: ```suggestion
[DuckDB](https://www.duckdb.org) is a new analytical data management system that is designed to run complex SQL queries within other processes. DuckDB has bindings for R and Python, among others. DuckDB can query Arrow datasets directly and stream query results back to Arrow. This integration allows users to query Arrow data using DuckDB's SQL Interface and API, while taking advantage of DuckDB's parallel vectorized execution engine, without requiring any extra data copying. Additionally, this integration takes full advantage of Arrow's predicate pushdown while scanning datasets.
```

Thoughts?

Reviewer 4: maybe also add filter?

> There are three main aspects that make this integration unique:

Author: ```suggestion
This integration is unique because it has zero-copy streaming and data access between DuckDB and Arrow. This results in three main benefits:
```

# DuckDB's queries can now produce a Record Batch Reader
record_batch_reader = query.fetch_record_batch()
# Which means we can stream the whole query per batch.
# This retrieves the first batch
chunk = record_batch_reader.read_next_batch()
```
#### R
```r
# Reads dataset partitioning it in year/month folder
nyc_dataset = open_dataset("nyc-taxi/", partitioning = c("year", "month"))

# Gets Database Connection
con <- dbConnect(duckdb::duckdb())

# We can use the same function as before to register our arrow dataset
duckdb::duckdb_register_arrow(con, "nyc", nyc_dataset)

res <- dbSendQuery(con, "SELECT * FROM nyc", arrow = TRUE)
# DuckDB's queries can now produce a Record Batch Reader
record_batch_reader <- duckdb::duckdb_fetch_record_batch(res)

# Which means we can stream the whole query per batch.
# This retrieves the first batch
cur_batch <- record_batch_reader$read_next_batch()
```

The preceding R code shows in low-level detail how the data is streaming. We provide the helper `to_arrow()` in the Arrow package which is a wrapper around this that makes it easy to incorporate this streaming into a dplyr pipeline. [^1]

## Benchmark Comparison

> Here we demonstrate in a simple benchmark the performance difference between querying Arrow datasets with DuckDB and querying Arrow datasets with Pandas.

Reviewer 4: I think @jorisvandenbossche comments are fair, maybe we should add something like:
(Note:  In all these benchmarks DuckDB runs in parallel, while pandas only support single-threaded execution. Besides that, one should notice that when we only compare automatic optimizations. DuckDB's query optimizer can automatically push down filters and projections. This automatic optimization is not supported in pandas, but it is possible for users to manually perform them n the ```read_parquet()``` call. .)

Author: I like it, I added it as a suggestion (with some minor edits) a bit lower https://github.com/apache/arrow-site/pull/168/files#r762110685

For both the Projection and Filter pushdown comparison, we will use Arrow tables. That is due to Pandas not being capable of consuming Arrow stream objects.

> For the NYC Taxi benchmarks, we used the [scilens diamonds configuration](https://www.monetdb.org/wiki/Scilens-configuration-standard) and for the tpch benchmarks, we used an m1 MacBook Pro. In both cases, parallelism in DuckDB was used (which is now on by default).

Author: ```suggestion
For the NYC Taxi benchmarks, we used the [scilens diamonds configuration](https://www.monetdb.org/wiki/Scilens-configuration-standard) and for the tpch benchmarks, we used an m1 MacBook Pro. In both cases, parallelism in DuckDB was used (which is now on by default).

For the comparison with Pandas, note that DuckDB runs in parallel, while pandas only support single-threaded execution. Besides that, one should note that we are comparing automatic optimizations. DuckDB's query optimizer can automatically push down filters and projections. This automatic optimization is not supported in pandas, but it is possible for users to manually perform some of these predicate and filter pushdowns by manually specifying them them in the `read_parquet()` call. 
```

Reviewer 4: perfect, I think it looks good!

Reviewer: Isn't it more properly "TPC-H" not "tpch"?

Reviewer 3: It is.

Author: Good catch, thanks!
